Docs 2.0 content technical review (#676)
graknlabs/docs: 0001-typedb/03-admin/04-ha.md

Reviewer: @lolski : Please perform technical review.

---
pageTitle: High availability
keywords: typedb, ha, replication, failover, raft
longTailKeywords: TypeDB replication, TypeDB high availability, high availability
summary: TypeDB high availability guarantees and solution.
toc: false
---

# High availability

## Overview

<div class="note">
[Note]
High availability features are available only in TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

> TypeDB Cloud supports the following high availability features: 

Reviewer 2: I'm a little bit unconvinced all of these are high availability features. They're more like TypeDB Cluster (ie. cloud) features. Are you set on calling this whole page High Availability?

By nature, I'd say TypeDB Cloud/Cluster has the following features:
- Scalable cluster size from 1 node upwards
- Raft

And because we can use multiple nodes combined with Raft we get:
- high avaibility (when using > 1 node)
- primary/secondary failover 
- data replication
- Strong consistency

It might be worth reviewing the writing with @lolski  as well

Author: They are definitely HA features. The only ones I could come up with. Feel free to add if you can come up with some new ones.
And we don't need a TypeDB Cloud/Cluster page here. We need the page for High Availability. We will add more HA features when we add them to the Cloud.

> * Server clusterization,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Server clustering,
```

* [Strongly consistent model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strong_consistency),
* Data and schema replication with primary/secondary replicas,
* Primary replica failover using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Synchronous replication using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Client level load balancing.

## Replication

TypeDB replication is performed at the database level. Specifically, there is a separate replication group for each 

> database. Every database has a separate replication group. There can be multiple replicas of a database, but only one 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
database. There can be multiple replicas of a database, but only one 
```
This sentence is redundant, it's exactly the same as the previous one

per server.

There are two types of replicas: primary replica and secondary ones (or leader and followers in Raft terms). There can 
be only one primary replica of a database at any given time. It is possible that primary replicas of different 
databases can be on the same or different servers. Primary replicas location can’t be set manually, only through

> [election process](#leader-election) (as per Raft algorithm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the internal [election process](#leader-election) (as per Raft algorithm). Leader elections should happen relatively rarely in a stable network.
```

By default, all write and read operations are performed on the primary replica. Reads from secondary replicas have 

> no guarantee of up-to-date data. But reads can be very costly (especially with rules). There is a "**read any replica**"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no guarantee of up-to-date data. But reads can be very costly (especially using the inference option). The "**read any replica**"
```

> transaction option to be able to read data not only from primary replica. If the option set to **True** then TypeDB 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transaction option allows clients to read data from the primary or secondary replicas with automatic load balancing.
```

> Client will choose a random replica to balance the load between replicas. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: That's important to understand the load-balancing algorithm.

<div class="note">
[Note]
TypeDB Cloud uses ZeroMQ for replication and gRPC for replication management.
</div>

> ### Leader election

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this is a bit too internal for the user to case? The next 3 sections are "user visible" in some way, but this one is not?

Maybe a better section that is more user visible would "Primary failover" and we can then discuss when failover happens and what that means to the user (eg. the primary may change, but clients will automatically find it when connecting for writes/strongly consistent reads)

Reviewer 2: I think in a `failover` section you could do a small paragraph about leader election, but I think that's more of a link to a Raft resources than having to explain exactly how leader election happens.

Author: This is of high importance, since the primary replica:
1. Provides unique functionality (all writes, a guarantee of up-to-date data, and default read data)
2. Can be on a different server for every database.
3. Can't be easily recognized or chosen manually.

Hence, we have some explanations and a link to the raft for details.
As for the failover term — I would also prefer it but when I was interviewing Ganesh there was some misunderstanding of the term initially. 

That's why I have tried to avoid it when possible. If you think it's OK, let's use it.

```suggestion
### Primary replica failover
```

All replicas start as secondary replica. The only way for replica to become a primary is to win an election. Election 
is won by a replica which is voted by the majority of replicas in cluster.

Any secondary that didn't hear from a primary for a set time out period plus/minus random margin will start an 
election. Every replica will participate in only one election at the same time.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

This is an internal process and should not be visible to users and applications, as TypeDB Clients should be able to deal with that transparently (apart from possible query response error due to server failure, that caused the failover/election event).

```

For more information on Raft consensus algorithm please read the [Raft algorithm documentation](https://raft.github.io/).

### Synchronous replication

To support synchronous replication TypeDB Cloud sends transaction acknowledgement to a client only when consensus is 
reached — when the majority of replicas acknowledge receiving the replicated data.

## Data persistence

To persist data on disk TypeDB uses [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org/) with its write-ahead-log (WAL). The data stored as 
files on filesystem in data directory set in the configuration file (it may be overridden by the command line 
arguments). WAL can be used to restore data that didn't get to main storage of a server due to sudden crash or a 
power loss.

> There is also a raft replication log being used entirely for replication purposes.

Reviewer 2: I think for Cluster the second paragraph is as important as the first. You could refactor this into something like:

```
TypeDB uses RocksDB for data persistence. RocksDB is a durable storage layer with an internal WAL... 

There are two main parts of data persistence. One is for user data: the schema and data instances. The second is the aft replication data...
```
This makes the user learn about data storage as general idea, and the shows them there are two instances of being used in Cloud/Cluster. Both are configurable, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
TypeDB uses [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org/) for data persistence. 

RocksDB is a durable storage layer with an internal write-ahead log (WAL). The data is stored as
files on a filesystem. WAL is used to restore data that didn't get to the main storage of a server due to a 
sudden crash or a power loss.

There are two main sorts of data being persisted:

1. Database schema and data instances.
2. Raft replication log.

Both are persisted in directories set in the configuration file. Those can be separate directories or the same one. 
The paths to the storage directories can be overridden by command line arguments.
```

## Load balancing

> Load balancing can be done by TypeDB Client for read type transactions with the `read_any_replica` options set to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Load balancing can be done by any TypeDB Client for read type transactions with the `read_any_replica` option set to 
```

`True`.

> When instantiated, client usually set up with a list of all replica addresses. Additionally, it can use auto-discovery 

Reviewer 2: This is less about load balancing than how the clients actually communicate with the cluster. Do you want to rename this section to `Client connections` and start by discussing that clients have cluster auto-discovery built in and only need to connect to one node of the cluster? You can then also have a paragraph about load balancing settings.

Author: I feel like load balancing is a much more important topic. And we don't want it to be only one sentence. And the topic of how a client connects to a server should be more or less irrelevant due to it being an internal process, transparent for users. But the server auto-discovery function needs to be described somewhere and I found this to be the best place. As it directly influences the load balancing (read_any_replica query goes to any server in cluster, not just the ones you set in your client connection).
